---
title: Cookies
description: "Instructional entry on cookie making "
categories:
  - blog
cover: cowboy-cookies
publish: 2021-06-16T15:43:49-05:00
---
Hello, Bakers! And, welcome to my first official food blog. I think a great item to start with, no matter your skill level, is cookies! 

Even if you’ve never made cookies from scratch, chances are you’ve bought pre-made cookie dough, rolled that dough into balls, and baked them at home. I’m here to tell you that not only does homemade cookie dough make much better tasting cookies, it is also much easier to do than you may think! Once you get the hang of it, you may never go back to that premade tube. 

First, I need to get a little housekeeping out of the way. I’d like every one of you to know the best tip for any bake you wish to pursue going forward. Whether it’s cookies, pies, cakes, breads, or even a savory dish recipe, everyone should acquaint themselves with *mise en place*. *Mise en place* is a french term meaning “everything in its place”. It’s used frequently in the culinary world by chefs and pastry chefs alike. Here’s what it means practically: read through the recipe, then scale or measure all of the ingredients you’ll be using. Take out any bowls, spatulas, and other tools you’ll be using throughout the process. This is such a huge stress reliever and time saver. Print out the recipe, write notes on it concerning time, temperature, or anything you want to highlight. Before starting the bake,  play it out in your head beforehand and visualize the process. All this will make you more likely to succeed on your first try. *Mise en place* will change the way you approach baking and is something you can easily carry into your future baking, especially if you are attempting a more advanced recipe for the first time.

With that out of the way, let’s get to making cookies! There are a few different methods to making cookies, but I’m going to explain the one I use most in my recipes. It’s called the creaming method. In this method we will separate our ingredients into three categories: fats, wet, and dry. We will begin by creaming the fat (usually butter and/or oil) with sugar. This creates an airy, silky base for our cookie dough. Then, we’ll add any liquid ingredients such as milks, eggs, juices, and/or extracts to complete the wet base for the cookie dough. Finally, you’ll add your dry ingredients; these include flours, baking soda, baking powder, spices, nuts, chocolates, etc. Depending on the cookies you may separate your flavor enhancers like nuts and chocolate chips from your flour mixture. These flavorful bits are called your “mix-ins”. And sometimes these mix-ins can compromise the gluten you are working to cultivate. So, they may be added in at the very end, but each recipe will specify this. 

Now, let’s do some trouble shooting. After sharing cookie recipes over the years, one of the most common mistakes I’ve seen is a cookie that spreads too much. Oh, the heartache! After all that time, you’ve ended up with a cookie that is too thin, too crunchy, and maybe even burnt on the bottom or edges. So, I’d like to explain why this sometimes happens to help you avoid it from the start! Spreading can happen for a few reasons. One being the unintentional addition of fats via non-stick spray. Typically, I see home bakers just spray their pans with oil, but this is an example of how extra fat can sneak into your dough and can cause more spreading than you intended. How do you avoid this? Use parchment paper rather than non-stick spray! 

Another common cry is ending up with cookies that are too tough, hard, and/or crunchy. This is usually caused by an imbalance of dry and wet ingredients. My recipes were developed with weighted ingredients. The volume measurements are my best estimation of my weighted recipes. So keep in mind that when I say a cup of all-purpose flour is generally about 5 ounces I do mean in general. The weight of ingredients changes constantly depending on temperature, humidity, storage, and age. A cup of flour measured today that weighs 5.5 ounces can weigh 5.3 ounces tomorrow. This may cause a dramatic difference in the ratio of wet to dry ingredients which can alter the hydration in each dough, which in turn, may lead to tough cookies, hard cookies, dry cookies, cookies that spread too much, etc. My personal recommendation is to buy a food scale and use the weighted recipes from Milk + Honey to avoid any unwanted errors.

Finally, I’d like to discuss the little things we bakers do to make perfect cookies. A few of these things might seem odd at first, but I believe they will help take your cookies to the next level and have people asking you, “What bakery did you get these cookies from?” The first secret is I leave my eggs and butter out overnight to come to room temperature before making cookie dough the next day. This helps with the emulsification (fancy work for fat incorporation) of the fatty ingredients into the cookie dough. Another thing I always do is use an ice cream scoop to portion out the cookies. It’s easier than using a spoon, it’s much faster, and it makes all the difference in consistency between all your lovely cookies. 

After scooping, I chill my cookie dough balls before baking them. I like to leave them in the refrigerator overnight then bake them off the next day. This little, extra step gives you a great crunchy bite while maintaining a chewy center. If you don’t have that kind of time, you can either leave the cookies in the fridge for at least 2 hours or let them chill in the freezer for about 10-15 minutes before baking. Trust me, it makes a real difference where texture is concerned. 

The last technique I use is called carry-over baking. All this means is I take the cookies out of the oven before they look completely baked. I leave them on the hot sheet pan for at least 5 minutes. The heat from the pan will finish baking the cookies without over-baking them. Only after the carry-over baking is complete do I then transfer the cookies off the sheet pan and onto a cooling rack before serving.

That covers all my thoughts on traditional cookies. I hope y’all enjoyed this blog and continue to cultivate your baking passion with me!